---
layout: post
title:  "Hypertext in the Holocene"
date:   2019-02-14 15:30:00
---

The thing about the hyperlink is that it is thoroughly *unmagical*; it
is downright banal. At it’s core the hyperlink is a reference from one
document to another. Footnotes are hyperlinks. Endnotes are hyperlinks.
Indexes are (kind of) hyperlinks.
[Catalogues](https://library.wrdsb.ca/) are hyperlinks. It’s just a
quick way to pass between disparate sources of information. This
inherent banality has, however, allowed the hyperlink to become totally
ubiquitous. Today it is odd to create without linking. How can I frame
context? How can I provide background? I cannot easily do either on
this two-dimensional unlinked page. Sure, I could type out the URL in plain text. I could do this:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperlink

But what does that really mean to anyone? We all know what that string
of text is now but in the past we sure didn’t. If the web giants of
today have their way we won’t be able to identify it in the future
either. There is a strong chance that the Age of the Hyperlink becomes a
blip on the geological record. We are in it now, yes, but the man behind
the curtain is becoming more obscured by the day. Today is all “app
this” and “cloud that”. The gears are covered in mud even as we create
more gears (and more mud). There is an everpresent danger in
simplification. Eventually, no one will be able to put the gears back
together. At that point, we lose a lot.

There are threads running counter to this. Coding in the classroom.
Emulation. Net neutrality. The nerds haven’t disappeared; they have just
assimilated. They started playing sports and driving cars. They got fit
and showered more frequently. Most importantly, they found supercool
intelligent girlfriends. Technical prowess used to be a surefire path to
mom’s basement and now it seems like the only bankable skill left. At
the same time that the gears are being obscured more and more people are
learning how to fit them together. Some are even learning how to build
the gears themselves. There is a incompatibility here; one that will
surely breed conflict in the future. Ultimately, I cannot decide which
side I am on. I want user interfaces to be friendly to allow wider
participation. I also want flexibility and the power of customization to
allow for greater understanding. I want people power but that power
could stem from simplicity (horizontally) or complexity (vertically).
Some how, some way, increase the people power in three dimensions!

The hyperlink really is simply three-dimensional text. It is text with
*depth*. It is comparable to the difference between a flat-file
spreadsheet and a relational database. To extrapolate this analogy a
little further: text still remains at the forefront of what we do. Most
ideas start as thoughts but become codified as text. 99% of strings are
text, still. Likewise, 99% of data is in spreadsheets, still. How much
of that data would be better in a database? How many of those words
would be better as hyperlinks? There are many good reasons why the
simpler route is the road most travelled. Usually, we don’t recognize
the need for complexity until we are irrevocably mired within it.
Luckily, converting a flat text file is many factors easier than
converting flat spreadsheets. Data structure is difficult to alter.
Structure still matters in a piece of writing but text structure can be
massaged, coaxed, and nudged into comprehension. You needn’t look any
further than this page for proofs. I hope.

Now the larger issue: The hyperlink does something strange to collective
human consciousness; If such a thing can be said to exist the hyperlink
makes that thing even fuzzier than ever. Collective human consciousness
was always a ghostly concept. Hard to pin down, hard to define, hard to
prove. Ultimately the hyperlink will only exacberate that condition.
More information, more opinions. More accessibility, more opinions. More
opinions, less truth. More truth, well, we don’t really yet understand
what happens when there is more truth. My personal opinion is that we
cannot actually create any more truth. Truth is finite but more and more
data is created by the day. Throughout history this was always the case.
On June 10th, 323 BCE there was X amount of data. On [June 11th, 323 BCE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Death_of_Alexander_the_Great) there was Y amount of data. Then, on June 12th there was X+Y amount of data. There is always more and more data.
Sure, some data gets lost. I had thoughts today that I won’t remember
tomorrow. More importantly, I had thoughts today that were not written
down or otherwise transmitted to any other being. These thoughts are
lost to the ether. But I also did have a lot of thoughts today that were
actually transmitted to other beings. With the hyperlink, it does not
matter whether the receiving individual remembers these thoughts or not,
they are now stored for prosperity, sometimes forever.

Exhibit A: My first tweet from many moons ago still exists. I could delete it, sure, but why would I do that? 

Here it is as a clickable URL:
<https://twitter.com/start_words/statuses/452523697195470848>

And here it is embedded:
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">&quot;living in beta&quot; - scary.  <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/gafesummit?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#gafesummit</a></p>&mdash; Marc d&#39;Avernas (@start_words) <a href="https://twitter.com/start_words/status/452523697195470848?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">April 5, 2014</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

And here it is in plain text (just in case): Marc d'Avernas @start_words "living in beta" - scary. #gafesummit

What does this tell us? Depends on how much we care. What does this tell
me? Boatloads. This is a giant container ship full of information to me.
If, by the grace of the wisest being, someone else might be interested
in what mattered to me, this could potentially be boatloads of
information to someone else as well. The hyperlink is an arrow cocked in
a bow, ready to be unleashed, but maybe never let fly. The hyperlink is,
at the very least, latent energy.

For the sake of debate why don’t we break down just what this data could
mean: Let’s start with the display name: “Marc d’Avernas”. This data
point is dynamic but it is not clear from the copied and pasted data
that it is dynamic. If, say, I change my current display name, the hyperlink will reflect the change but the pasted text will not.
Ultimately this does not matter much because if I recall correctly I’ve
only ever changed my display name once--to something silly like a
backwards font. Lots of folks do change their display names, though, and
this information may be valuable to them. My point is that the hyperlink
will point to dynamic data but the text will only ever be static. This
may matter, or may not, depending on who you are, but the hyperlink at
least provides the potential for dynamism. Plain text will never do
that.

The next disparate data point: my @. This, as one can clearly
tell from the URL, is not dynamic and can never be dynamic. Twitter, for
now (and likely, for good technical reasons, forever), will not allow a
user to change their @. This goes for the text of the tweet as well but
that’s a whole other barrel of fish. Ultimately there is no functional
difference between the @ in the hyperlink and the @ in the plaintext.
The display is different, but the data remains, and will remain, the
same. As for that data? Merely an attempt at a clever library-related
play on words. It will forever get my goat that @startwords was already
taken but such is the life of a late-adopter.

For funsies, here is that goat-getter:
<https://twitter.com/Startwords>

For posterity, here is their very first tweet (embedded):
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="in" dir="ltr">Hidup adalah tentang memaafkan diri sendiri dan orang lain. <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/quotes?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#quotes</a></p>&mdash; Startwords (@Startwords) <a href="https://twitter.com/Startwords/status/105527303303462912?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">August 22, 2011</a></blockquote><script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

And just in case, unadorned: Startwords @Startwords Hidup adalah tentang memaafkan diri sendiri dan orang lain. #quotes

[Translated from Indonesian](https://translate.google.com/?um=1&ie=UTF-8&hl=en&client=tw-ob#view=home&op=translate&sl=auto&tl=en&text=Hidup%20adalah%20tentang%20memaafkan%20diri%20sendiri%20dan%20orang%20lain):
“Life is about forgiving yourself and others”. Damned if that isn’t
unequivocably superior to my own first tweet. They can keep the @.

Moving on with the meat and potatoes of my tweet, the text: “living in beta - scary”. This, as I touched on earlier, is also not dynamic and
should not change. I say “should not” because there is a vociferous
subsection of twitter users who would like to be able to edit their past
tweets. As this screed hopefully makes plainly clear this would be a
monumentally shortsighted idea for twitter. The hyperlinks would become
meaningless and everyone would be forced to hardcopypasta for future
reference. This would drive down engagement, which would hurt twitter’s
already razer-thin bottom line. So no I don’t think they’ll do that. I
digress. My tweet was a comment on the modern software philosophy of
continuous improvement and iteration. This concerned me at the time
because I like stability. This concerns me less today because I have
been living it for a good five years now. Nowadays it is not so much
scary as annoying. Kind of like if twitter allowed users to edit their
tweets.

Finally, the hashtag. Ah, the hashtag. What
is there to say about the hashtag? It has become so ubiquitous but I
don’t know if much has been written about it. When all is said and done
the hashtag functions essentially as another hyperlink—from the
user-generated tag to a pre-filled search for that tag. The hashtag does
have limited use outside of the hyperlink but it is the hyperlink that
made it ubiquitous. Without the hyperlink, the hashtag becomes
functionally indistinguishable from a common keyword. For our purposes,
my \#gafesummit hashtag is loaded with dynamic meaning. GAFE stands for
Google Apps for Education, and the GAFE Summit is an annual workshop for
teachers to learn how to utilize google apps in the classroom. Since
this particular hashtag is not dated it is still in regular use. Talk
about dynamic! Years of additional data have been added since my
original tweet.

In summation, when you add up the four elements of my tweet you have
rich trove of static and dynamic data to mine. This is all thanks to the
hyperlink.

I’ve spent the past few paragraphs singing praises to the hyperlink. It
is time to address the dark side. Besides the general obfuscation of
truth I had touched on earlier, there is another more practical issue at
hand here. The hyperlink hides underneath text. It is subterrenean. As a
result there must be trust in the hyperlinker. The hyperlinkee must be
sure they are going to the correct place. With the proliferation of
fancy-dancy web services and APIish behaviours there must definitely be
trust that the hyperlink is [going to do what it tells you it is going
to
do](https://www.latlmes.com/tech/hyperlinks-are-not-what-they-seem-1).
Human nature dictates that this rule is broken repeatedly. As long as
there is profit to be made in obfuscated links, and as long as profit is
our god, the individual should never ever trust a hyperlink. Outside of
password leaks, hyperlinks are probably the \#1 vector for mischief on
the internet. If hyperlinks are the bedrock of the web and mischief on
the web is ubiquitous, then hyperlink shenanigans will always be
constant and inevitable. It’s like living in Iceland; if you aren’t
prepared to get lava on you at some point then what are you even doing
there?

There is another more insidious factor at work here. Clicking on a
hyperlink is an act of convienience. Sure, you *could* just type out
that absurdly long URL string (with encrypted authentication *plus*
Javascript API call), or, you could just click on the underlined text.
Me? I like [simple unadorned URLs](https://startwords.github.io/).
Artisanal URLs, if you will. I like it when a URL can be typed out if
needed. The web, unfortunately, does not by and large work like that.
The web is a complicated place. Much too complicated for simple URLs.
Convienience has become paramount out of necessity. The issue here is,
simply put: convienience breeds laziness. People expect the hyperlink to
do so much work for them. The footnote has become functionally extinct
on the web. It has been almost entirely superceded by the hyperlink. If
the proof is in the pudding then the sugar is in the hyperlink.

Let’s unpack that last thought a little bit: The hyperlink has done
something strange to the act of debate, the process of research, and by
extension the concept of truth. Now, you can back up every single
sentence you write with proofs via the hyperlink. The web is a vast
trove of information; there are proofs everywhere for everything.
[You](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/you#English)
[could](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/could#English)
[even](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/even#English)
[provide](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/provide#English)
[proof](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/proof#English)
[for](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/for#English)
[every](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/every#English)
[single](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/single#English)
[word](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/word#English)
[in](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/in#English)
[a](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/a#Article)
[sentence](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sentence#English). Hell, you
could even do it for each
[c](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/c#English)[h](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/h#English)[a](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/a#English)[r](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/r#English)[a](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/a#English)[c](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/c#English)[t](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/t#English)[e](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/e#English)[r](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/r#English)[.](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Unsupported_titles/Full_stop)
Protip: don’t do any of [this!](https://startwords.github.io/2019/02/14/Hypertext-in-the-Holocene.html) It’s a pain and your reader will hate you.
Discourse on the interwebs has devolved into an endless downward spiral
of defining terms and when we are not locked in rhetorical tug-of-wars
we are intentionally misunderstanding each other! The state of research
is in even worse sorts than debate. Too often these days research
consists of typing in a keyword, clicking a link, scanning (or worse,
CTRL-Fing) a document for a sentence that backs up your ludicrous claim,
and then copying and pasting the URL with a sophomorphic “BAM!”

Full disclosure: I did very little research for this post. I wouldn’t
say I’m a newb, per se, but I am certainly no expert. I am more like a
neutral observer; an early-stage millenial whose day-to-day work sits
firmly in the intersection of tech and libraries. In other words at the
crossroad of tools and knowledge. In other words the place where
practice and theory might meet. My words here are not the truth, oh lord
no, but they are *a* truth. They are my truth and they are important to
me. I would also like to think I would give a fair hearing to your truth
as well. Unless you are a nazi punk then [fuck off](https://genius.com/Dead-kennedys-nazi-punks-fuck-off-lyrics).

Now, for the million [dogecoin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dogecoin)
question: What’s my point? We need a new way of looking at and teaching
literacy. Critical text interpretation allowed us to see the message
behind the book, but we kept looking at the same texts over and over
again. Your Shakespeares and your Hemingways and your Goldings and what
have you. 21st century texts are online and hyperlinked. Subtext
requires more digging. It’s not just there in between the lines on the
page any more. Remember [Racter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Racter)?
The Policeman’s Beard is Now Fully Constructed and it is Mining Your
Clicks For Ad-Revenue.

And finally: What do we do about it? Fund public education, make digital
literacy central to the curriculum, and support public and K-12
libraries. Teach kids to code, sure, yes, that’s good, but don’t forget
to teach them to read beneath (and behind and around and above) the code
as well. Explain algorithms. Explain AI. Explain ad networks. Most
importantly, explain libertarian techno-capitalism. Pull back the
curtain to reveal the code and then pull back the next curtain to reveal
the people behind the code just like we did for so many years with all
those ancient white male authors. This needed to happen a decade ago. We
are legimately running out of time here, folks. If we continue to
half-ass this one I will not blame the polar bears one bit for coming to
eat us. 

This one’s for you, [Gus](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=maQTLIWUZtw).


