---
layout: post
title:  "The Whole Truth"
date:   2020-06-27 4:02:30 -0600
---

Salâm! Nǐhǎo! Privét! Kumustá! Kónnichi wa! Yeiá sou! Guten tag! Shalóm! Etc... Hello, everyone. I have a story to tell. Don't worry; I know how busy you all are, so I promise I won't take up too much of your time. Even though it is far from my strongest suit I will try my damnedest to minimize verbosity and maximize brevity. Oops, I think I failed already. In any case, I feel it will be worthwhile or at the very least somewhat interesting for you to listen carefully. And if it's neither of those things, then I apologize profusely. Since there is no other logical place to begin might as well start at the beginning:

It was an ordinary day. Dull and gloomy, but this is ordinary for November in Canada. A warm, calm sunny day just wouldn't feel right. My alarm woke me up at 6:30 am. I showered, got dressed, took my dog out, ate breakfast, made a coffee, and was out the door. On my way to another exciting day of multilingual cataloguing. 

Well, to be perfectly honest, it's not that exciting, but it keeps me busy and also magically refills my bank account on a bi-weekly basis. I've been doing it for a few months now and despite the sarcasm I do rather enjoy it. While I occasionally yearn for something to cross my desk that might actually make some sort of sense, multilingual materials keep me on my toes and allow me to make unfair sweeping cultural generalizations that I would not normally be able to make; like the fact that Russians still hold a significant and potentially dangerous grudge against Americans, or that Mandarin pop music is even more vacuous and cookie-cutter than our own. Luckily, the people upstairs had promised me that I can move on to English language materials the next day. There were just a few loose ends to take care of today. All the leftover stuff that's been sitting around forever and is in no rush to go out, but might as well get done now. It promised to be an interesting and multifarious day: Farsi, Mandarin, Russian, Tagalog, Japanese, Greek, German and Hebrew. Not just novels either, but non-fiction, kids books, movies, and music as well. Basically the entire gamut of the bibliographic universe compressed down into a single day. Needless to say, after a few hours of this, my head was spinning around like I just rode the Gravitron on fair day at UN headquarters. I felt a little queasy. At lunch I ate my sandwich, stared at a wall of books, and thought about the nature of language. 

I thought about how much simpler life would be if the human race could get together and agree on one particular standard language to use for the rest of time. How doing so would foster cooperation on a worldwide level and bring about total world peace for the first time in our illustriously violent history. But then again, this would certainly lead to the untimely death of cultural diversity. All the neat little societal quirks of people all over the world would be melted down into one giant bland unspiced stew. No, I didn't want that. Conflict is an unfortunate but necessary byproduct of multiculturalism. After that practical conclusion, I began to get a bit metaphysical. Does anything really exist outside of language? Aren't we creating objects by naming them? If so, does that mean a *chair* is an entirely different thing from a *chaise*? Is a *table* entirely unlike a *mesa*? If so, how can I describe these books using English when the terms mean absolutely nothing to someone who only speaks another language? 

With that thought in mind, I went back to work feeling just a little bit absurd, which made me long for the wooziness of the mosiacal Gravitron. The afternoon passed quickly. Maybe absurdity isn't so bad after all. Before I knew it the job was done and it was time to go home. I was simultaneously relieved and saddened that the multilingual stuff was done for the year. From now on I'd be using a lot more reason and a lot less instinct. Reasoning was never my forté. I placed the books back in their bins, shut down my computer and with due ceremony said goodbye in fifteen languages. 

During the drive home I came to a tentative conclusion: language defines reality. Because we all live inside our own minds and can never step outside of that limited framework the words we choose to name objects will inevitably become the objects themselves. And if we choose not to name something, well then it doesn't even exist at all. Like how Eastern cultures have an entirely different concept of love than we do. Something more akin to fidelity rather than romance. This elasticity of language in turn defines the way we live our lives. If, say, a culture does not value romantic love, they do not feel the need to ever name it, and thus it does not even exist to them. And so, something so central to our own society can have no correlation whatsoever in another. No wonder people go to war with each other. It's almost magical the way that we can create something out of nothing through the use of language. No, it's not almost magical, it *is* magical. By putting down these words and then by having others read them I am performing magic. I'm a magician! Despite the snarling traffic on the expressway, I smiled broadly and floated home unimpeded.

The evening passed uneventfully. More than a little bit burned out, I decided to let passive entertainment do the thinking for me for the rest of the evening. Sports, in this case; the ultimate catharsis. After an indeterminate amount of time spent basking in the wondrous glow of the modern opiate of the masses, I was ready for bed. After a few administrative details (making my lunch, taking my dog outside, brushing my teeth) I crawled under my covers, picked up my book, and started reading. After a few sentences came and went without meaning, I began to realize something was horribly wrong. I could no longer read English! The print was an incomprehensible mess! It was almost like when you try to read a book in a dream; the words were practically falling off the page. I panicked, I started to hyperventilate. I just couldn't comprehend what was happening. I picked up a different book and still it was the same. I picked up another, still the same. Another, same. Somehow over the course of months of looking at books in other languages, I had forgotten what English looked like. My language, my only language, was no longer my own. How was I going to do my job? How was I going to live my life? I began throwing books across the room, I started tearing out pages and ripping them up into tiny pieces. Somehow, destroying the words made me feel better. They were all lies anyway. I had no use for them anymore. I systematically tore up every single book I owned. After this momentous task was finished I was completely spent. I laid down on my bed and quickly fell asleep.

Sometime during the night I was visited by a glowing woman of various races. Her eyes looked Asian, her nose Persian, her hair Nordic, her lips Anglo, her ears Slavic, her chin African, her eyebrows Hispanic. She was sublimely beautiful. She began repeating the same line over and over again but in different languages: "*Es gibt keine Sprache ohne Falsch*", "*il n'y a pas de langue sans tromperie*", "*no hay lenguaje sin engaño*", "*er is geen taal zonder bedrog*", finally, after repeating this same line hundreds of times in every language that has ever existed, she looked into my soul and said clearly, with finality, in English: "there is no language without deceit". Then she faded away, without magnificence, without splendor, without any kind of pageantry whatsoever. I was left alone in the abyss only to be awoken by the sound of my alarm some time thereafter. 

6:30 AM. Time for work. I went through my usual routine like a languageless zombie, not even capable of decrying my insatiable hunger for human cerebral matter, completely unaware of what occurred the night before. Only during the drive to work did I allow myself to think back on what exactly had happened. As a test, I tried reading a line from the little notebook I keep in my car. The words jumped out at me as clear as day: "There is no language without deceit". I mused: transferring meaning from one soul to another is one of the most magical feats our species is capable of performing. And also one of the most difficult. Because something always gets lost in translation. It is too easy to misrepresent, even if you are not even trying to. In fact, it is completely impossible to represent anything with pure truth. All is lies, all is fiction. I'm not a magician, I'm a sorcerer.

Arriving at work considerably out of sorts, I made my way to my desk and turned on my computer. Waiting for the thing to boot up, I took a look through a few leftover multilingual materials on my desk. I was amazed to find that I could read every single word perfectly. Every single word of every single language. Somehow, that beautiful apparition had given me the gift of polyglotism. Suddenly, connections between disparate objects began to form. I began to see the universe as one giant spider's web, every object linking to every other object, in complete harmony. The mysteries of science, nature, religion and humankind were revealed to me in unison. It was exactly at that moment that I ~~died~~.

Well, that's my story. I hope you found it enlightening, or at the very least mildly entertaining. I realize it's not quite as succinct as I would have hoped but they always turn out that way. When it comes down to it, there is always room for more words, even though they only serve to muddy the truth. Khuda hafiz! Zàihuì! Poká! Paalam! Sayōnara! Adio! Auf wiedersehen! Lə-hitraót! Goodbye all. Never stop lying.
