---
layout: post
title:  "Beware the Dodos"
date:   2020-06-29 04:02:30
---

One day the dodos came back. No one knew how or why but all of a sudden they were here. It started with just one. At first people were shocked, awed. It became a superstar. It went on Conan O'Brien and did a silly dance. People were elated. See? They said, death is just a word. Miracles occur, they proclaimed. Then, even more suddenly, there was another one. It went on The Daily Show and discussed fracking. People were impressed. Wow! They said, we did not realize. We did not realize what we were doing, they admitted. Also suddenly but by now somewhat expected, another dodo appeared. It wrote a book titled Dodo Philosophy. The book stayed on the bestseller list for a record consecutive week span. People were enlightened. It's right! They said, we must love all things! People began to understand that what they had been doing before was not the right thing to be doing and all it took was a small, terrestrial, helpless extinct bird to show them the error of their ways. Before long the dodos walked the Earth once again. Before slightly longer, everyone had their own dodo. Dogs got jealous. A few dogs disappeared, no one noticed. After all, the dodo was smart as well as cute and loyal. The ultimate companion. A fount of love, truth and wisdom. After a while people began to get two or even three dodos. There was the occasional food shortage but people just tightened their belts and asked their dodos what to do. The dodos told the realists to relax, breathe, and look to the clouds and the dreamers to relax, breathe, and watch where they were walking. The people listened. Some looked up and some looked down and all were happy with what they saw. Then one day a man was found dead. Beaked. The dodos claimed it was an accident. How could someone not believe them? They were so wise and so adorable and we did them so wrong so many years ago. Soon enough the beakings became regular. Death certificates started needing to be templated. Enter name, enter date of death, and no need to enter cause of death because it was always one thing: Yep, beaked. Soon the dodos moved into the nicest neighbourhoods, ran all the top businesses, and sat in office. One day, no one knows quite for sure what day because the dodos were not keeping track, the dodos outnumbered the people. At this point the dodos started getting a little bit pushy. People walking down the sidewalk had to step aside if a dodo was coming towards them. People were not allowed to use dodo bathrooms or go to dodo schools. The dodo schools were the best. They had tons of musical instruments. Eventually people-murder became sanctioned. Shortly afterwards it became sport. Some people ran and some people hid but nobody fought back. Finally after much hardship and brutality there was one person left. One person and 7 billion dodos. That person was me. I lay silently as countless dodos beaked and clawed me into submission. As the world went black I reflected on what we had done and what we had accomplished and what we had taken and I came to the realization that this and only this was exactly what we deserved. Thanks to the dodos it is exactly what we got.
