---
layout: post
title:  "Bread for Pigeons"
date:   2020-08-02 08:00:00
---

один

Her eyes open deliberately with a nascent smile adorning her lips. It is early; the birds have only begun to consider the possibility of the sun. The bluish pre-dawn sky promises a glorious day. She has sat up, had a drink of water, and is now watching a slight breeze outside her bedroom gather momentum in order to prelude the light. In no rush, she arises slowly and shuffles to the window. It is Saturday. A good day to be alive, she thinks. She exits the bedroom en route to the adjoining kitchen. First, always first, boil some water. As the stove collects warmth she flips on her radio. Static. She adjusts the dial. Still static. A shadow of a frown crosses over her face but passes quickly due to a slight rumble emanating from the street outside her front door, a soft footstep, a tiny clink, and another rumble that quickly fades away. Oh, the milk! She opens her front door and is greeted by the expected milk bottle and an unexpected note underneath. The note placards: *Dear valued customer. Unfortunately, we are discontinuing our milk delivery service. Please visit the store location for all of your future milk related needs.* She brings in the milk as well as the newspaper and places them on her kitchen counter. The kettle sings just in time.

два

She pours herself a steaming tea with milk. One lump. Just one, for she watches her sugar intake closely. All who know her know she is sweet enough. She opens the daily paper. Front page: **Bold Proclamation!** She quickly flips the page. Second page: **Unsubstantiated Opinion!** She sighs and provides a counterpoint by turning the page once again. Next, the comics: safe humour in triptych. Her smile returns as she moves from panel to panel, from comic to comic. After a much needed respite from reality she flips over to the obits. No one new today. She imagines all of the people she knew and loved and respected looking back at her with determined eyes. She settles into her kitchen chair with sublime contentment. Once the tea (and perhaps a biscuit) is consumed, she returns to her chamber in order to complete final preparations for her day. Off to the library, the post office, and then the bank in that precise order.

три

With her face firmly on, she steps out onto the porch of her modest bungalow. Living in an older established section of town she has but a short walk to the simple unadorned bus stop. The sign says *Line 1*. Being of the cautious sort, she arrived early and proceeds to utilize the opportunity to watch the clouds slowly roll by. There is no bench so she must stand. Not a problem; she's from stoic stock. Her ancestors stood proudly and so shall she. The antique city bus pulls up to the stop and creaks it's metallic doors open for her, and only her, to enter. The driver closes the door behind her and proceeds along the route. The bus empty, she selects a spot up front close to the bus driver. "Beautiful day today isn't it?" she asks. The driver nods politely and points to a sign with very clear instructions not to distract the bus driver. Shortly after she reaches her destination and shuffles out of the door at the end of the line. On her way out the driver interrupts: "Our apologies but this route is being discontinued indefinitely, starting tomorrow. We have appreciated your ridership." She exits with concern, the doors shut, and the bus roars away. 

четыре

She steps out into the sunshine in front of a glass-enclosed post-modern alien-warship building. The public library. Gone are the days with massive roman columns, deep sound-absorbing carpets, and narrow dark corridors. Now are the days of abstract designs, concrete floors, and wide open spaces. She mostly likes the change; the free and omniscient natural light allows her to see with clarity and the vaulted ceiling draws away the everpresent sound of children both happy and sad. Normally she would bide her time here but her day is full and she must move on quicker than she would like. She approaches the main desk and asks politely to borrow the latest issue of National Geographic. The clerk sighs then replies: "I'm sorry dear. We had to discontinue our print periodical service. There was just not enough interest." The clerk then brightens as they recall, "but, we do have a temporary free subscription to this new e-magazine lending platform. All you need to do is download the app on the latest tablet or smartphone device, fill in some standard personal information, and you'll have access to thousands of different magazines for as long as the generous vendor offer is available!" The lady regretfully declines; she has no such device, much less the latest. The library clerk had already moved on to the next patron so she exits the building empty-handed.

пять

Her next destination sits just a bit down King Street. That bastion of democracy, that original connector, that very first internet: the post office! The post has been healthier so this building is not so impressive. Folks these days have their emails and their texting and their video calls and have no need for physicality anymore. She misses seeing her grandchildren but knows that this, like all things, will pass. She approaches the postal worker with a friendly smile and a glint of joy in her eyes, "I would like to send this letter to my son." Gruffly, they reply: "Yes ma'am of course, do you mind if I inquire what might be the contents of said letter? Her Majesty's Goverment would like to ensure no contraband passes through the post." She stops, considers, and proceeds to explain the purpose of the letter: a monetary gift. Her son has been down-on-his-luck lately and she is hoping the money could be used to purchase some toys for his children. The postal worker thanks the poor lady and takes the envelope with a smirk barely visible on their vicarious visage. "No problem at all. I will ensure your package makes it to the desired location." Confident, satisfied, she thanks the worker and heads on her way.

шесть

A little further up King, onto Queen, her next destination imposes itself: a flawless marble neo-classical edifice framing a gold and glass entryway. Where else, who else could continue to be such a presence in times like these? The bank, of course. Value is created and then kept within never to see the light of day. A tall handsome security guard opens the wide spotless glass door for her to enter. "Thank you kind sir," "you're very welcome ma'am, have a nice day" he replies. The teller greets her with a mysterious smile. "Good day. I would like to withdraw some money from my account please". "Certainly," the teller gestures towards the machine in front of them, "please enter your card and pin." She abides but she cannot help but wonder what then the point of the teller might be. A red light appears followed by a cryptic error message. The teller consults their computer and looks down with an excess of pity: "Unfortunately, this is a joint account and has been closed by one of the stakeholders. I'd be happy to open a new account for you if you like". There must be some mistake, she thinks. "There must be some mistake," she says. The teller shakes their head. "Sorry but the system indicates it was closed by the other account holder a few weeks ago," the teller concludes with a firm flourish, "if you need anything else from our institution we would be delighted to oblige." She wasn't listening; she had already started blindly, deafly, unconsciously making her escape. The security guard ignores her on the way out. The gold/glass door is heavy and difficult to move.

семь

She gathers her wits back at the bus stop. No need to worry he probably just needed the money to buy groceries. She will phone him tomorrow. The bus arrives with a different driver from this morning but their face is similarly vague. Not much in the mood for forced conversation she sits at the back of the bus this time. To her utmost chagrin there is a person already occupying said prime real estate. The person is dressed haphazardly and is mumbling loudly to themselves. She decides to intervene against her better judgement: "lovely day today isn't it?" The person is shocked out of their reverie. "Lovely! A lovely day you say?" She nods, they continue "lady, there are no such things as lovely days anymore. We took too much and never gave anything back and as a result there is no such thing as a lovely day anymore." They start speaking more quickly, more excitedly "sure, the sun may be shining and the grass may be growing and maybe even the breeze may be blowing but it's not fucking lovely". She is taken aback but she is not afraid. They continue "lovely! What a concept. What a word to describe what a world" they lock eyes "you might as well be living in a masquerade. Masks are lovely but nothing exists behind them." A pause, a breath, and then the crux: "Since I like you I'm going to tell you a secret. Listen closely! The magnetic poles are going to switch one day. North will be south and south will be north. On that day all electronics will cease to function. Society will collapse, man will eat man, and the bears will roam free on four legs like their ancestors always intended. It will be glorious and I for one long for all the lunacy. Truly, that will be a lovely day." She doesn't quite know what to say to that. Who would? Luckily, her stop is approaching so she thanks them for the advice and exits the bus. 

восемь

Dusk. Finally home, she washes up, changes out, and settles in to her favourite armchair. There is nothing like sitting down to a well-earned rest after a busy and productive day. She flips on her TV and is rewarded with a rare treat: A live production of Tchaikovsky's Eugene Onegin on the local broadcast channel. A bit late but just in time: Act 3 Scene 1 is just beginning. After a brief polonaise the scene centres on Onegin as he laments his comfortably wasted life. She wonders if Onegin has ever known hunger, cold, deprivation. She thinks not. An écossaise follows, and Tatyana enters. The soprano is wearing a flowing red gown and is absolutely outsinging the orchestra. She settles back into her chair and allows the sung words to flow around and through her. Onegin takes over again some indeterminate time thereafter: "Везде, везде он предо мною!" he sings sadly. Suddenly the broadcast ends, a short dark interlude follows, and an elaborately coiffed man appears on screen. He speaks: "My fellow countrypeople" pause for effect "I know these have been trying times. We all miss our friends, our coworkers, our loved ones. We all deserve a hearty pat on the back for everything we have sacrificed over the past few months. Well" another pause for effect "I am standing before you today to announce that the pandemic is finally over! You are free to return to your friends, your coworkers, and your loved ones!" She beams in her armchair. The coif nods and steps away from the podium. The regularly scheduled broadcast resumes just as Tatyana sings her last line. The audience of plants applaud, the curtain closes, and the stage goes dark.

девять

For the first time in quite some time she goes to bed without a hint of worry or anxiety. Everything will finally go back to normal. She can finally visit her grandchildren again and hug her son, who surely needs it. Her quilted comforter is not necessary tonight since her inherent warmth is enough. She drinks a sip of water and picks up the magazine on her bedside table. Last month's issue of National Geographic. She flips through aimlessly past the letters to the editor, past the user-submitted nature photography, past the advertisements for various affordable status symbols, towards the image of a rainbow hovering over a glacier in Iceland. She loves this photograph. The accompanying article discusses how in the absence of copious amounts of airplane CO₂, glaciers across the globe have begun to regrow ever so slightly for the first time in hundreds of years. The article describes a new epoch, wherein the human race is not actually hurtling towards imminent extinction. She recalls the yelling prophet from earlier and wonders what became of their mother. They would like this article, she thinks. Perhaps tomorrow she will cut out the article, ride the bus, and attempt to brighten that poor person's day. She turns off her lamp and sets the magazine down without reading the last tiny subscript sentence: <sub>*This article has been generously sponsored by Enbridge.*</sub>

десять

During the night her eyes flicker while asleep. Inside, she is sitting on a park bench on a lovely summer day. She is carefully breaking bread and feeding it to the small polite crowd of pigeons who are milling about around her feet. Oddly enough, the pigeons bear the faces of her grandchildren. She is smiling and spreading her bounty. The pigeons eat quickly and fly away, pausing to defecate on a statue of Sir John A. An imperceptable frown crosses her lips, but you cannot see it. You cannot see it because she's wearing a mask. Everyone in the park is wearing a mask. Everyone in the world is wearing a mask.

